# Utilizing Python Matplotlib Package for Data Visualization of In Cancer Clinical Trials :wave:

| Evan Beall
| ebbeall@iu.edu
| Indiana University
| hid: fa18-523-80
| github: [:cloud:](https://github.com/cloudmesh-community/fa18-523-80/edit/master/paper/paper.md)

---

Keywords: Python, Visualization, Matplotlib, Cancer, Oncology

---

## Introduction

Cancer clinical trial research is an ever-evolving field.  The pharmaceutical companies that carry out these trials employee individuals  of various backgrounds to carry these trials out successfully.  The individuals required to run these trials have backgrounds that range from scientific, business, operational, etc.  In order for these various teams to work together efficiently, the business units involved in this pursuit will need to be able to communicate effectively.  Individuals from these varied business units will have different specializations and prior knowledge.  To accommodate the varied backgrounds between groups communication can be aided by visualizations.  Visualizations provide a method that allows all business units involved regardless of background to have a general understanding of research progress.  

In the last several years, cancer research data has been ported into Electronic Data Capture (EDC) systems [@fa18-523-80-www-edc].  These EDC systems function only as databases to have data entry performed and hold data.  These systems have no native way of creating visualizations.  Due to the lack of native visualization capability, data needs to be extracted and run through software that can quickly and effectively create visualizations of large data sets.  One such tool is the Matplotlib package that is available via Python programming.  

Cancer research is beginning to utilize big data technology like Matplotlib to help to analyze, standardize, and communicate results.  Matplotlib is a open source library within the Python environment.  This environment provides simple but extremely powerful 2D and 3D visualizations of large amounts of data [@fa18-523-80-www-tutorialspoint-matplotlib].  Matplotlib is currently not widely used in clinical trial research but could become an extremely powerful tool within the clinical trial ecosystem.  This tool would be especially helpful for scientists and data managers to be able to display their trial progress to those that do not come from a scientific background.  The types of visualizations available within this library range from basic scatterplots that require little outside knowledge to interpret; all the way up to EEG plotting capabilities that require specific medical knowledge to interpret.  An example of the EEG plotting capabilities can be seen in +@fig:matplotEEG.

![Matplot EEG [@fa18-523-80-Hunter:2007]](images/Matplot_EEG.png){#fig:matplotEEG}

## Architecture of Electronic Data Capture Systems

Database structure of an electronic data capture system can vary widely across industry pharmaceutical companies [@fa18-523-80-www-edc].  The data present in each of these systems will vary based on several factors.  These factors include:  phase of trial, therapy being investigated, type of lesion being research, etc.  While a trial is actively accruing and treating patients, the data within the EDC system is unstructured and it is nearly impossible to create comparisons between other trials [@fa18-523-80-www-edc].  The goal of this research is to prove that these new drugs provide benefit to the general public and allow patients to glean those benefits.  

In the United States the FDA is an organization in place to guard the general public from harmful and useless new treatments being brought to market.  Every new treatment resulting from a clinical trial needs to submit its data to the FDA to gain approval to market the drug.  To accomplish this, the clinical trial research community has created a structure that standardizes data once it has been extracted from the electronic data capture systems used in a clinical trial.  This standardization structure is called Study Data Tabulation Model or SDTM [@fa18-523-80-www-SDTM].  SDTM provides a standard structure for both human clinical and nonclinical studies to be submitted to the FDA for approval.  In 2004, SDTM was chosen by the FDA as the standard that would be utilized for all submissions for drug approval [@fa18-523-80-www-SDTM].

Clinical trials can vary widely regarding what observations are collected throughout the life of the trial.  SDTM provides a set of defined variables that each of these observations will need to fit into.  Each of these observations are broken down by topic, timing, qualifiers, and identifiers depending on the type of observation that is being assessed [@fa18-523-80-www-SDTM].  Each observation is then sorted into a domain.  Domains are groups of variables or observations that are related by a topic-specific commonality or scientific commonality.  In general, each domain correlates to a corresponding dataset, however, some domains can be spread across multiple datasets.  Examples of datasets that are used in Oncology clinical trials are:  DM (Demographics), AE (Adverse Events), etc [@fa18-523-80-www-SDTM].  Utilizing SDTM coded databases allows for data coming out of electronic data capture systems to be compared.  In turn, this allows for the FDA to compare across clinical trials to assess the scientific backing of each submission to the FDA.  The FDA is then able to better analyze the efficacy of the research and if the general public would benefit from having this product available in the American healthcare marketplace. This standardization also allows for comparisons to be drawn between research done all over the world.   

## Matplotlib Use Case for Clinical Trials Visualizations

Oncology clinical trial research and clinical trial research in general generates an enormous amount of data.  Clinical trials can include thousands of patients with health data for multiple years at a time.  Managing this massive amount of data is not a small task.  Thousands of individuals are involved in the procurement, entry, cleaning, and manipulation of these databases before a clinical trial can be called a success or failure.  The cost to bring a drug to market is currently estimated to be about 648 million dollars.  Along with this, it is estimated that the cost to run one clinical trial depending on its phase could be anywhere between 10 million to 40 million dollars [@fa18-523-80-www-ajmc-drug].  

When this many people from differing backgrounds are working together to carry out each of these trials, it is necessary to have a concise and universally understood way of communicating trial progress and goals.  This is where matplotlib's visualizations tools can be an extremely powerful asset.  The visualizations created via Python's matplotlib library would provide researchers a way to communicate with other business units in ways that do not require oncology knowledge.  Utilizing visualization tools allows for workers with different backgrounds to communicate in a universal manner.  Some examples of visualizations that may be helpful during trials would be identifying how many patients are responding to treatment positively, showing a graph of how long patients are remaining on the investigation therapy, or showing a graph of the characteristics of tumors that are being studied.  An visualization that plots survival status of patients on treatment can be seen in +@fig:survivalstatus below:

![Survival Status [@fa18-523-80-www-medium]](images/Survival_Status.png){#fig:survivalstatus}

Communicating outcomes such as those seen in +@fig:survivalstatus early on in the study can inform other business' units decisions.  The survival status layout shown in the image above can be interpreted by the medical team to determine patients benefit gained from the study.  Medical staff might be able to determine trial futility earlier on in the study utilizing visualizations such as this.  These individuals are then able to pass this information on to other internal teams while utilizing the visualization to communicate their analysis.  Following this, the budgeting departments might be able to make decisions on where to increase or decrease funding. Increasing the availability of visualizations to everyone involved in a clinical trial would allow for better communication and potentially save millions of dollars throughout the life of a study.  These visualizations would provide a method for each business unit to have robust oversight throughout the trial.

Most of the current electronic data capture systems are built in SQL based relational databases.  One such SQL based system is an Oracle based database called Inform [@fa18-523-80-www-edc].  Databases like Inform do not provide great tracking or visualization tools for people of all backgrounds to be able to understand how research is progressing.  Most individuals involved in clinical trials research are not well versed in data manipulation, statistical analysis, or querying databases.  This is the most critical reason why accessibility of visualization tools would be a large boon to large pharmaceutical companies allowing all business units to be able to communicate with each other during the clinical trial process.  Visualization tools will allow for earlier analysis of clinical trial research to occur by all business units such as budgetary, medical, and legal.  The cancer research industry uses statistical teams to perform deep analysis, however, utilizing this staff is expensive and time consuming.  Each time statistical analysis is run on the entire trial, it requires fully committing statistical colleagues to run analysis on every aspect of the trial.  By instead utilizing visualization tools, each business unit would be able to quickly run analysis on specific aspects of the trial.  Visualization tools would provide a quick glance at specific areas of interest allowing all business units to quickly determine if the study/research is going as planned.  If these units have further questions regarding trial progress, then a full analysis can be performed on the study.  This could save time and money for the company as a whole.  Also, having a robust oversight plan would allow for mistakes and problems to be caught even earlier.

## Matplotlib Architecture

Matplotlibs architecture is split into three different layers.  The layers involved in producing a plot with the matplotlib library are the backend layer, artist layer, and scripting layer [@fa18-523-80-www-aosa].  These layers are developed in a stack orientation in which the layers can talk to the layers below them, but the lower layers are not aware of those layers above them [@fa18-523-80-www-aosa].  The backend layer involves FigureCanvas, Renderer, and Event classes.  The FigureCanvas class involves the area where the plot will be drawn.  The renderer class actually does the drawing of the plot.  Finally, the Event class handles keyboard or mouse events that might occur during the drawing process.  The Artist Layer is the middle layer of the Matplotlib stack.  Within this layer is the Artist class.  This class allows the user to create and customize the plot.  Allowing for the system to understand the drawable area on the canvas and what type of titles and types of plots should be drawn.  An example of how the Artist layer functions is displayed in both +@fig:artistplot and +@fig:artistflow

![Artist Plot [@fa18-523-80-www-aosa]](images/Artist_Plot.png){#fig:artistplot}

![Artist Flow [@fa18-523-80-www-aosa]](images/Artist_Flow.png){#fig:artistflow}

+@fig:artistplot diplays the final output plot that is being generated by the Artist layer.  +@fig:artistflow shows the hierarchy of how this finished plot is built within the artist layer.  

Finally, the Scripting Layer utilizes the pyplot API to allow the user to speak to the backend layer and make choices about what is represented in the plot that is created.  This is the layer that the user will interact with and create code to influence the other layers of the library.

## Matplotlib Features for Clinical Trial Research

Matplotlib is a massive library that allows for easy creation of basic plots, while also providing the functionality to create very intricate and powerful visualizations depending on your skill with the library.  The most utilized package within the library is pyplot.  The usefulness of the Matplotlib library is found in the versatility of visualizations that can be created.  Very basic analysis can be run and presented in laymens terms to those individuals that are not versed in clinical trials research (such as the public) or more advanced visualizations can be run for internal teams. 

Some plots and features that are available within the Matplotlib package are: line plots, multiple subplots, histograms, data handling, three-dimensional plotting, streamplotting, tables, scatter plots, gui widgets, log plots, EEG plots, etc [@fa18-523-80-Hunter:2007].  There are several applications of the offered matplotlib features that would be extremely useful when running analysis in the middle of a clinical trial.  Specific examples are gui widgets.  This powerful tool would allow individuals with no knowledge of data handling to model outcomes if specific criteria were to happen.  In oncology clinical trials and example would be: if a certain number of patient's cancer progress within a certain time point, they would choose to discontinue the trial.  Another visualization that would be helpful throughout these trials would be basic line, bar, and histographs.  These types of graphs require the least amount of external knowledge to interpret.  With these types of charts it is easy to show how research is trending.  Researchers would be able to visualize how tumor size is increasing/decreasing in the patient population over the course of a trial.  Other business units would be able to clearly see if tumor size to understand and make changes based on these results.

## Conclusion

Carrying out an oncology clinical trial successfully results in a massive output of data.  This data needs to be analyzed throughout the course of the trial in order to ensure goals are being met.  By analyzing the data output frequently, it will allow all business units involved to make better decisions to help both the patients and the company carrying out the trial.  Current electronic data capture systems do not natively have functionality to create visualizations of the unstructured data within them.  However, by utilizing the SDTM standard chosen by the FDA to give the data structure and combining it with the matplotlib Python package these problems could be remedied. The visualization created by the matplotlib package would provide pharmaceutical companies with a great way to communicate both internally and externally throughout the course of a trial.  The visualizations available within matplotlib provide plotting functionality for basic to advanced plotting depending on the audience that they are intended for.  Utilizing the matplotlib package throughout the course of the trial could allow pharmaceutical companies to make better decisions for patients, budgetary decisions for themselves, and provide progress updates for potential investors.  These factors and much more make a great argument to start to implement the matplotlib package's visualization tools into standard practice for clinical trials research. 
